Roberto, in The Power MBA we have
analyzed Lean Startup in great
detail because we are authentic
lovers of methodology and
have already learned to identify
the hypotheses, know the concept
of the minimum viable product,
but I am very aware that to really
be able the day you face it to
apply Lean Startup is very complicated
and to be able helps a lot
to have visualized many cases
of how many companies have
done it, because if not, the
inertia or the trend is
not to apply it, is to let
us take what we have always
done, by the palenolification,
by the business plan
and by executing.
What I'm going to ask you as an
expert in Lean Startup is to illustrate
us with several cases, with several
examples, in this case of how
a minimum viable product
can be carried out.
The first thing I would like
to say is that what we will
see here now are some examples
that are based obviously
on the Lean methodology and the
concept of the minimum viable
product and then also on
different tools.
The important thing about all this
is that we keep in mind that there
are many tools and many examples,
but not all fit our
case.
We have different tools that we
can or cannot apply to our
case and that we simply have
to make ours.
Depending on the technique we
use, we will learn one thing or
another and apply it in one way
or another.
It is true, because here there is no single
formula to create a minimum viable product,
but what I am convinced is that if
you don't know the ones there are
they won't happen to you because you
have to be very very very very very
very creative.
of course.
And once we know, we have already
seen some, once we know some
more, I think that with that mental
reference it is easier the day
you face to create your minimum
viable product, good because
to use some of the usual
techniques.
Of course yes.
One of the best examples
of low-cost products
is crowdfunding.
At the end of the crowdfunding
by essence, by definition, what you
have is a concept that can be more
or less evolved, it can already
have the physical product or
not.
And then you put it on a crowdfunding
platform and what you are doing
is validating that the customer
really wants that product because
it is already advancing you
a capital or money when the product
you still don't have it and most
importantly, you haven't delivered
it for sure because that's
the essence of crowdfunding.
So by definition and concept
it seems to me to be the best example,
one of the best examples
of minimum viable product.
Crowdfunding is perfect because you
first ensure you have a feedback
with huge notoriety, that
here what you want is notoriety,
it is interaction, it is not notoriety
of your product itself.
What is very important is that the
platform itself is designed to
validate products without having
them developed in the
cases, for example Kickstarter
and also clearly has another derivative
and is that as you go well you receive
a lot of capital, something
that is already, it is a sum,
it is an essence of many concepts
that in the end together
in a single tool.
For example, in London, they
captured when drones started
to be a trend because they
captured even millions of
dollars with a design,
with a concept and that
then because in the end
it went well, they captured
a lot of money through
a crowdfunding platform
and then could develop
the product.
If it's true, if I would like to
highlight that not obviously as
everything is not so simple, it's
not just having an idea,
plant it on a crowdfunding platform
and already success comes.
No, no, of course no, there is a
lot of prior work, obviously it has
to be accompanied by the previous
phases, we are very aware of
it, because obviously we
have to work well first what is
the concept, very well who is the
customer, what channels, imagine
that you want to put forward
a crowdfunding campaign
for a certain product and your
customer is not in those channels,
it is not online, because
then obviously the crowdfunding
will not work.
Then there are some things to validate
before, it is not simply,
I insist, without putting a
crowdfunding campaign and it is
already.
Another example, a landing
page, is a landing page.
We remember a project, a startup in
which we were working that
was for the sport and in this case
what we wanted to do was an app
to put together, put in common
people who wanted to practice a
type of sport in team and that
obviously the typical example, you
hear, you will play a football
match with colleagues and
you miss two or three people
and you do not find.
The concept we had was, heh,
we're going to put up
an app so I can put that event
in that app and find those
two or three people that may
be missing to make the game.
And we have a landing, a landing
that you then move on your social
networks, in some of the communities
and with it you get feedback
of whether people are really
interested in this app or
not.
In the landing, no more,
what you have to do is raise
a proposal of interest based,
for example, on an email
and a few questions.
You have to be very careful because if
you ask a lot of questions what you
do is that people are willing to leave
you information.
So the cleaner you are, the better
the results you will get.
Landing has an advantage and is that
you can do it today and it is people
who don't know it and tools
like Unbounce, for example, there
are a lot of tools that
allow you to create a landing page
without knowing how to program
in a day and esthetically
perfect.
You can use this landing in many
ways, you can use it in personal
interviews by teaching it
to your potential customers
and seeing how they interact
in what they tell you.
But also what you can do is, as you
say, bring traffic to the landing
and create a call to action and
measure and conversion if they leave
the data or do not leave the
data, etc.
If you have done some previous work
and already have some community,
because it is easy to send traffic
to the landing, if not, because
typical tools that of ads, today
Facebook works very well or Google
ads or some other to send
some qualified traffic to the
landing.
It doesn't value any traffic because
otherwise, obviously the conversion,
the conversion drops a lot.
And this in one day.
In a day, yes, of course.
We are talking about Lean, testing
and testing very quickly.
The faster we can do it,
the better results obviously.
I am that comes to mind in many cases
of entrepreneurs who have been giving
it back to their idea for months
and making presentations in power
point such and such and wasting
time.
And I could have created a landing
page on the first day, started
to bring traffic, pointed out
to your target audience and that
same day had obtained valuable
information about whether
they were on the right track
or not.
of course.
They have been doing it for
months or so.
It is very usual.
We have commented on it before, in
the end the concept of lean and
the concept of minimum time is
understood very well, but then
apply it, the truth, that people
cost you a lot.
Well, we will try
to make it.
Another example, another project
we have developed, for example,
applying the off magician.
We wanted to develop a cloud,
a software, a software.
Developing a SSA is very expensive.
Developing software is costly,
because a health is even more,
because it is ultimately on
a cloud platform, on an online
platform.
What did we do to validate this
concept, this experiment?
Instead of decanting for the traditional
development of the SSA directly,
what we have proposed
is an experiment where the user
left us their data in a
landing.
We downloaded the data locally,
we worked with that data and
the result was put on the
landing and the customer
could download it.
Then we did the complete cycle,
the customer experience obtained
it without having developed
the health.
Then it may seem a bit complicated,
but in the end if you think about
it, it's not.
It is simply a landing so that the
customer has that same experience
that they can have with the SSA without
the SSA existing.
This is also a minimum
viable product.
You spend a lot less, validate the
concept and learn about the way.
This is another example of a minimum
viable product.
It is that the frontend
or customer experience is the most
similar to what you want in the
future, but you do not have it developed
because it is that they develop
these are months and hundreds
of thousands of euros.
Then the experience that the customer
receives is very similar, not
exactly the same, but very
similar and what you do is you as
an entrepreneur or as a startup
manually deliver the value bet
to the customer.
Many times, it has not been
explained, but many times the value
of interaction really
is, that is, what adds value is
the interaction that is generated
from technology, but it
is not technology so.
of course.
Instead, entrepreneurs do what they
do is wrap up in technology,
but they could validate that really,
as you say, without developing
anything of code.
Because what brings value is not in
particular that frontend or that
technology, what brings value is the
interaction that will be generated.
That is.
This is the most important
thing, especially at this
stage of our discovery.
We must not forget that by applying
lean we are discovering,
validating concepts and we see
if we will see if this
customer is really well identified,
if we have a product-market fit.
The most important thing,
as you say, is the interaction.
Why is it?
Because that's where I'm going to learn the most.
And once I have those learning,
then I will be in a next phase,
of accelerating or going
faster, and there I will
take the technology.
Another experiment, other techniques
you can use are mock-ups.
At the end of a mock-up what
you want is also to validate
a concept or concept.
And in this case another experiment
that we have put forward is about
the idea that we commented before
an application for sports, to
find, we made some mock-ups
on tools.
Do you remember any tools?
Oh, you are now picking me up.
I used InVision once.
Invisibility is true.
Ninja Mock is another.
There are many.
With the fact that you put
prototypes or mock-ups on Google,
you will find a lot of free, some
pay, depending on the functionalities
you want.
And these tools also allow you
to make the customer experience
very similar to a real application
without having programmed
absolutely anything.
It gives you a potential, a ability
to do experiments that was previously
unimaginable.
Returning to the example, we put these
mock-ups and delivered them
to the customer, to the future customer.
We saw how he reacted.
In this case, what you need to do is,
hear, this is the solution we have
put forward and what you need to do
is look at how it interacts,
look at how it generates that experience
with those mock-ups and therefore,
obviously, draw many conclusions.
We did a very similar experiment
when we made a mock-up
with InVision of an
app on a restaurant theme.
Programming the app would have cost
you 200,000 euros and we did it in
InVision.
I have a job of designers, etc.,
but I do not have much work.
I have been working for a week
and we had the possibility
on the mobile, even with the icon
and everything, to navigate the app
in a very, very similar way to the final.
And what we did was sit down with
potential customers and see how
they reacted and so on.
And that saves you, of course.
But there are many people who do not do it.
And what it does is directly already
developing the application.
And then you have very little waist,
because when you have already incorporated
a functionality within the application,
it has cost you a folder, it's
months of program work, etc.,
and then it turns out that
that functionality doesn't like.
You have already complicated your application
or platform, your website, etc.
You have less flexibility to go.
You burned resources that are
scarce, obviously, and you
generated some functionality that
wasn't entirely validated and now,
go back, because obviously
it's more complex.
And already to finish I will add
about this of the mock-ups, what happens
is that it is true that there are people
in the launch phase that
already, there are people who already
understand this and do and use it,
but, because I also know it, there
are companies, for example,
in the application, who already have
traction, already have hundreds
of thousands of users, etc.
So it seems they tend to forget about
that and when they add functionality,
they don't validate it before.
And it's really a mistake, because,
well, for the end, and the risk
is even greater, because sometimes what
you do is complicate something
that's already working for you.
You add new functionalities, creaturitis,
which Carlos Sánchez called in an
earlier class and you are complicating
the whole proposal
to value.
Validating new features
with a mock-up is a tip for
those who start from scratch
and have a product that
has hundreds of thousands
of users.
I really like the precision
you do.
It seems to me a mistake, but serious, if
you have a community and already have
some customers, not testing them with them.
In fact, many startups
do the opposite.
I, in the early stages, would struggle
or I would very much like to have already
a customer base where to prove that
not already, because it is really
one of the difficulties.
You have little community, you have
few customers, it costs you a lot to be
able to make interactions and it
turns out that when you already have a
product you forget those interactions
and you are already going, as someone
says, in automatic.
I think this is a very significant mistake.